# Introduction to Intel GPU

Intel has a long history of GPU product development. Though the history is very long, Intel's GPUs are mainly the integrated GPUs inside CPUs so not suitable for performance and heavy workload. However, Intel GPUs were known to have the best built-in media codec support in the market.

In the middle of the 90's the GPU market it's growing fast and many companies were developing their own discrete GPU products, and so did Intel. Intel developed and released its first discrete GPU Intel740 at 1998. It turned out to be a failure comparing to its competitors, so after a few unsuccessful attempts to continue this product line, Intel decided to integrated the GPU IP into the chipset northbridge. Then while the northbridge was removed from the chipset and its functionality was moved into the CPU core itself, the Intel GPU was integrated into the core too since Intel Core Nehalem microarchitecture. Since then the Intel integrated GPU line developed with Intel Core and gained the majority of GPU market share, though not charged separately and not many people will use it for heavy gaming and development tasks.

After more than 20 years of era of integrated GPU, Intel decided to re-enter the discrete GPU market with the new named Xe architecture across multiple lines: integrated, mobile, desktop, data center. The brand name to public is Intel ARC. There are overlaps between the old integrated GPU and the new Xe architecture since Xe evolves from the old Gen architecture, the Gen12 integrated GPU are also called Xe-LP microarchitecture.